# Report - Phase 4: Intermediate Code Generation

> Yongun Seong 2017-19937

For this fourth phase of the project, I implemented a translation routine to
convert the parsed and validated AST into an IR, more specifically a
three-address-code form. This translation is performed recursively starting at
the root of the AST, each node appending its TAC form onto a CCodeBlock handle
passed to each resursive call.

Unlike the previous phases, I chose to implement this phase in a top-down
manner. That is, I implemented the `ToTac` procedure for the root CAstScope
first, and worked my way downwards to each statement and expression type. I did
this because in the cae of this IR, the most complex parts were the bottom-most
expressions, especially the array indexing node, while the higher-level language
constructs were easy to translate.

As with previous phases, I noticed bugs introduced in the previous phases while
testing my implementation. Notably, I had introduced a bug while type checking
array indexing, and it was rejecting perfectly valid programs. I fixed this bug
by allowing array indexing code to treat pointers to arrays the exact same way
as the array themselves. Simultaneously, I ensured the `ToTac` procedure
correctly handled both pointer and non-pointer accesses to arrays by generating
IR like `t <- &A` when working with non-pointers.

I noticed that my implementation's output differs from the reference
implementation in some ways. Some of these differences were benign, such as
minor divergences in label numbers and names. In other parts, however, I am
still unsure of their significance, and may need to further modify my code in
the future, especially when we start generating code from the IR. This was
especially noticeable in the types around array indexing, where the reference
implementation used integers and void pointers as opposed to pointers to arrays
as reported by my implementation. Also, I am still not fully confident in my
implementation's ability to distinguish integers and longints, so plan on paying
special attention to it in future phases.
