# Phase 4: Intermediate Code Generation
In the fourth phase of our term project, we convert the abstract syntax tree into SnuPL/2's intermediate representation.

[[_toc_]]


## Description
Until now, our compiler has represented parsed source code as a graph using an abstract syntax tree. As we get closer to machine code generation, we need to transform this graph representation into a linear form called Intermediate Representation (IR) that is easier to translate to the final machine code. An additional benefit of using a (machine-independent) IR is that an optimizing compiler can perform various optimizations on the IR.


## Your Task
Your task is to transform the graph representation represented by the AST into the SnuPL/2 intermediate representation. 


### Overview
The translation follows the scheme outlined in the Dragon book chapter 6 (in particular, chapters 6.2, 6.4, 6.6, and 6.7). Carefully study the textbook, then apply the described concepts to our AST. The provided SnuPL/2 IR contains several classes for the TAC representation: `CTacInstr` represents instructions, `CTacAddr` and its subclasses represent different kinds of variables, and `CTacLabel` is used for labels. Blocks of code are managed by the `CCodeBlock` class. The `CScope` class and its subclasses `CModule` and `CProcedure` are containers representing the main code block and the code of subclasses. Methods to create labels and temporary values are also provided by the `CScope` class.

Examine the HTML documentation of the classes to get an idea about their roles, methods, and properties. As always, run
```bash
  $ make doc
```
in the `snuplc/` directory to generate the documentation from the Doxygen comments in the code. 

In the following, we provide specific information about the SnuPL/2 AST to TAC translation.


### Using the IR
This phase includes the source code of SnuPL/2's intermediate representation in `snupl\src\ir.cpp/h`. We recommend using the provided intermediate representation and its fully functional implementation; however, as usual, you can roll your own IR if you like. 

In the following, we assume that you are translating to SnuPL/2 IR. Details about the IR can be found in the [specification of the SnuPL/2 Intermediate Representation](../specification/SnuPL2.IR.md).

To translate the AST into IR, you have to implement the conversion routines of the AST (`CAst*::ToTac`) in `snuplc\src\ast_tacgen.cpp`. The translation uses both inherited and synthesized attributes as discussed in the lecture.

To get you started, here is the implementation of `CAstScope::ToTac`:
```C
  CTacAddr* CAstScope::ToTac(CCodeBlock *cb)
  {
    assert(cb != NULL);

    CAstStatement *s = GetStatementSequence();
    while (s != NULL) {
      CTacLabel *next = cb->CreateLabel();
      s->ToTac(cb, next);
      cb->AddInstr(next);
      s = s->GetNext();
    }

    //cb->CleanupControlFlow();   // remove redundant GOTOs - enable only at the end

    return NULL;
  }
```

Use the `CCodeBlock *cb` parameter's `AddInstr()` method to add instructions. Labels are created by calling `CTacLabel* CCodeBlock::CreateLabel()` with an optional descriptive string, and temporary values are created with `CTacLabel* CCodeBlock::CreateTemp(const CType *type)`.

The call `cb->CleanupControlFlow()` removes unnecessary GOTO's and labels from the IR. We recommend disabling this optimization to observe clearly what labels you are generating. Once everything looks okay, enable the call to clean things up.


### Translation of Statements
An inherited attribute `next` is passed to the translation method of each statement type. This inherited attribute denotes the location where the control flow continues after the current statement. The translation template for statements is thus

```C
  CTacAddr* CAstStatement::ToTac(CCodeBlock *cb, CTacLabel *next)
  {
    // generate code for statement (assignment, if-else, etc.)

    // jump to next
    cb->AddInstr(new CTacInstr(opGoto, next));

    return NULL;
  }
```

In other words, we insert a jump to the provided `next` label after encoding a statement. This will lead to many superfluous goto statements, but those are no reason for concern and can be eliminated using the method `CCodeBlock::CleanupControlFlow()` as described above.


### Translation of Expressions
The translation of expressions is a bit trickier because we have to distinguish between boolean and non-boolean expression evaluation. Non-boolean expressions can be translated in a straight-forward manner by simply emitting the operation with the correct operation and operands.
Boolean expressions, however, have to be evaluated lazily, i.e., once the result of a boolean expression is known, the remaining expression must not be evaluated anymore. This lazy evaluation allows us to write statements such as
```C
  if ((divisor # 0) && (dividend / divisor > 5)) then ...
```
because the second operand of the `&&` operator, `(dividend / divisor > 5)`, is only evaluated if the first operand, `(divisor # 0)`, is true.

As discussed in the lecture, lazy evaluation of boolean expressions is implemented by translating the expression into a series of tests and GOTOs, so called "short-circuit code". The expression
```C
  a && b
```
can conceptually be translated into
```C
    if a then goto test_b
    goto lbl_false
  test_b:
    if b then goto lbl_true
    goto lbl_false
```

This example shows that boolean expression evaluation require two inherited attributes, `lbl_true` and `lbl_false`, denoting the targets to jump to when the condition evaluates to true or false, respectively. 

The provided AST class system uses the same classes to represent scalar and boolean expressions; this complicates the differentiation between regular expression evaluation and short-cut code generation a bit. To accommodate this duality, `CAstExpression` and all its subclasses contain two `ToTac` methods with different parameter lists:
```C
  virtual CTacAddr* ToTac(CCodeBlock *cb);
  virtual CTacAddr* ToTac(CCodeBlock *cb, CTacLabel *ltrue,CTacLabel *lfalse);
```

The first method `ToTac(CCodeBlock *cb)` is invoked for expressions of any type. If the type of the expression node is boolean, we need to create the two labels `lbl_true` and `lbl_false`, then invoke the `ToTac(CCodeBlock*, CTacLabel*, CTacLabel)` method. We know that this will generate code that jumps to `lbl_true` if the boolean expression evaluates to true and to `lbl_false` otherwise. We need to anchor these two labels and assign the correct (boolean) result to the returned `CTacAddr*` instance. The following pseudo-code shows the idea for operations with one operand:
```C
CTacAddr* CAstUnaryOp::ToTac(CCodeBlock *cb)
{
  if (type is boolean) then
    create lbl_true, lbl_false, lbl_next

    call ToTac(cb, lbl_true, lbl_false)

    create temporary value of type boolean, temp

    emit code:
      lbl_true:
        assign temp, 1
        goto lbl_next
      lbl_false:
        assign temp, 0
      lbl_next:

    return temp

  else  // non-boolean type
    call operand->ToTac(cb)

    create temporary value of operation's type, temp

    emit code:
      assign temp, value computed by operand->ToTac()

    return temp
  end
}

CTacAddr* CAstUnaryOp::ToTac(CCodeBlock *cb, CTacLabel *ltrue, CTacLabel *lfalse)
{
  if (op is opNot) then
    call operand->ToTac(cb, lfalse, ltrue)

  else
    error
  end

  return NULL
}
```

Note that boolean expressions may contain subtrees with scalar expressions as shows by the following example
```
  a && (w * 5 + 3 < foo(x, y, z))
```

This means that you may have to call `ToTac(CCodeBlock *)` for non-boolean AST subtrees from within boolean expression evaluation and evaluate the result accordingly.


### Translation of Array Accesses
Up to this point, we have represented array element accesses by a series of expressions for each dimension. In this phase, we have to translate this abstract representation into a memory address.

To support open arryas, SnuPL/2’s implementation of arrays must adhere to the following properties 
  1. elements are ordered row-major
  2. the first element of an array `A` is located at `&A + DOFS(A)`
  3. the size of the i-th dimension can be queried by `DIM(A, i)`. `DIM(A, 0)` returns the number of dimensions.

The address computation is then a simple modification of the array element address calculation formula (6.6) in the textbook. 

The address computation code is implemented by `CAstArrayDesignator::ToTac(CCodeBlock *cb)`. One approach would be to emit the TAC instructions directly for the sequence of additions and multiplications. A better approach is to generate a higher-level representation in AST form and then call ToTac() on the AST computing the array element’s address - this way, you can reuse your existing code for expression evaluation and function calls and do not have to implement similar functionality twice. 

As an example, consider the definition
```C
  var i: integer;
      A: integer[10][5];
```
and the access
```
  A[1][3] := i
```
The AST generated by the reference implementation for phase 3 is
```
  := <int>
    [ @A        <array 10  of <array 5  of <int>>> ] <int>
      1 <int>
      3 <int>
    [ @i        <int> ] <int>
```

The reference implementation first converts the array expression into the following AST that computes the offset of the access relative to the beginning of array `A`:
```
    add <integer>
      mul <integer>
        add <integer>
          mul <integer>
            1 <integer>
            call [ *DIM(<ptr(8) to <NULL>>,<integer>) --> <integer> ] <integer>
              &() <ptr(8) to array 10 of array 5 of <integer>>>>
                [ @A        array 10 of array 5 of <integer>>>           A ] array 10 of array 5 of <integer>>>
              2 <integer>
          3 <integer>
        4 <integer>
      call [ *DOFS(<ptr(8) to <NULL>>) --> <integer> ] <integer>
        &() <ptr(8) to array 10 of array 5 of <integer>>>>
          [ @A        array 10 of array 5 of <integer>>>           A ] array 10 of array 5 of <integer>>>
```

This offset is then added to the address of the array. To maintain proper types, both the array reference and the offset have to be converted to pointers:
```
add <ptr(8) to <NULL>>
  cast <ptr(8) to <NULL>>
    &() <ptr(8) to array 10 of array 5 of <integer>>>>
      [ @A        array 10 of array 5 of <integer>>>           A ] array 10 of array 5 of <integer>>>
  cast <ptr(8) to <NULL>>
    add <integer>
      [...]
```

Finally, this AST is converted to three-address code by calling its `ToTac()` method:
```
      0:     &()    t <- A
      1:     &()    t0 <- A
      2:     param  1 <integer> <- 2 <integer>
      3:     param  0 <integer> <- t0
      4:     call   t1 <- DIM
      5:     mul    t2 <- 1 <integer>, t1
      6:     add    t3 <- t2, 3 <integer>
      7:     mul    t4 <- t3, 4 <integer>
      8:     &()    t5 <- A
      9:     param  0 <integer> <- t5
     10:     call   t6 <- DOFS
     11:     add    t7 <- t4, t6
     12:     add    t8 <- t, t7
     13:     assign @t8 <- i
```

You can find the source code for this example in `test/ir/test05.mod`.



### Test driver and reference implementation
The test driver for the fourth phase is built by running
```bash
snuplc $ make test_ir
snuplc $ ./test_ir ../test/ir/test01.mod
```

As usual, a reference implementation can be found in the directory `snuplc/reference`. 

Test files for this phase are located in the directory `test/ir/`. We advise you to create your own test cases to test corner cases; we use our own set of test files to test (and grade) your submission.



## Materials to submit
* Source code  
  Document your code properly - including Doxygen comments for all new classes, member functions, and fields.
  Please do not include any generated files (documentation, relocateable object files, binaries) into your GitLab repository. We will compile your code by ourselves.

* A brief report describing your implementation of the parser in PDF format  
  The report must be stored as `reports/4.Intermediate.Code.Generation.pdf`.  
  You can use the reports from the individual phases to compiler your final report at the end of this semester.
  Note that the reports are almost as important as your code. Make sure to put sufficient effort into them!



## Final words
Read chapters 6.2, 6.4, 6.6, and 6.7 of the textbook and study the [SnuPL/2 IR](../specification/SnuPL2.IR.md) and its implementation before starting your work. Do not hesitate to ask questions in class and on Slack. 
Also, start as soon as possible; if you wait until a few days before the deadline we may not be able to help you and you may not be able to finish in this phase in by the deadline.

Happy coding!
